Because the light was in my eye as I was talking to you.
Do you remember where we were?
Oh, she is, isn't she?
Wonderful.
She had the state of the arts.
She did a book about the Virgin Mary, I think.
Brilliant.
Wasn't it brilliant?
It's my kind of book.
I love to follow characters, ideas, through, you know.
It was a wonderful book.
I've read all of her books.
She did a novel that was quite nice, too.
It was.
It was good.
It was kind of nice.
Anyway.
Something about the father.
No, I think she's wonderful.
I admire her very much.
Anyway, her brother dropped her vest.
There's a theme, there's a new biography of Forster, and I didn't realize this.
Of course, everybody who has seen or read Howard's End knows that Bath died at the end of this avalanche of books, but he apparently used that theme of fallen books or manuscripts about five times, a manuscript falling into a ravine, not necessarily books out of a bookcase.
I wonder what that was all about.
What traumatic thing must have happened to him where he lost something in progress or some work?
You know, it's like Hemingway's police being left at the train station by his wife.
I mean, one wonders.
Getting back to the concern of these other writers you say about this, about your first, you used the phrase, leaving your children.
You are concerned, obviously, that this would be something that people would
It's certainly the stuff of tabloid, isn't it?
It's the kind of thing that people can misunderstand and misuse and misinterpret.
Well, you know, they do away.
The Daily Mail came out with a quote, supposedly from me, saying, I left my babies for the shores of love.
Well, now the lawyers are onto it.
But this kind of thing they invent.
But you see, the thing is, I have a daughter, two granddaughters,
a son and a son who died just before this book came out, but he helped me with it.
Well, I wanted to get the record straight, you know, because I knew that when the barber could come out, God knows what they would be saying.
You know, as much as for them as for me, I wanted to get this out.
Well, you end this, you conclude this book, too.
I mean, it's, the door had shut, and that was that.
That's the final sentence of the book.
Well, that's just ironical, because, of course, you do not shut the doors.
No, you shut the doors.
But, I mean, we're really getting on, probably.
These were pretty eventful times, weren't they?
You were a young woman.
You were thirty years old.
Yeah.
And it was a pretty eventful life for the first thirty years, wasn't it?
It really was.
Well, it went on being eventful.
That's a great line.
I always come into these interviews wondering, not being satisfied until I know I've got my lead sentence.
And also, I'd like to know how I'm going to conclude it, too.
You see, I think you just gave me my concluding sentence.
Of course, I haven't really asked you about the book, per se, because that speaks quite eloquently for yourself, but it seems forced to ask you to explain things that are in your book.
And I'm just so pleased to be able to talk to you.
I gather that there's nothing... It seems that...
I think this woman who reviewed for the Boston Globe was kind of myth that, I mean, it doesn't seem that there's anything to be repentant about.
I mean, you're quite content, I guess, with the life that you've lived, I guess is how I'm trying to crystallize, summarize this.
Well, you see, I've never believed in
Wishing things were different in the past.
There's no value in it.
I mean, what's the point of it?
I've never done it.
If you've done something, it might have been right or wrong, but you've done it.
I mean, you live with the consequences.
You don't sit around beating your breast and wailing about it.
But you're content with the course that your life has taken.
Content may not even be the correct word, but... What sort of choice were...
are these choices.
I think we have very limited choices actually.
Is it possible that I was struck by something, it didn't occur to me when I was writing it.
Various women journalists have said to me in London that they were impressed by the fact that I enjoyed being a young woman.
I physically enjoyed being a young woman.
Well, this seems to me very sad that
It should be commented on in tour.
And I have a theory, no more, that what has happened to young women is that they're being shouted at all the time, mostly by women's magazines and by doctors as usual.
Either they're being told that they're too fat or the wrong shape or something, or their skin should be different, or they should not have died.
I don't know.
They're being yelled at day and night.
And it's the women's magazines that do most of the yelling.
Either that or they're being lectured about breast cancer or something.
Well, we didn't have any of that.
Of course now, with the baby boomers, the big thing is dealing with menopause.
Yes, well, you see, I know women, we actually lower our voices when we say that we have no problems with the menopause, because we should look at our children in case somebody should overhear us, because it's always a duty to have a terrible time in the menopause.
You know, having read, I have to confess, I read that woman's, because it was published a couple of weeks ago, I read her review before I read the book.
To read this, this is the Boston Globe interview.
to read that review on its own, you would think that this book is humorless.
That's not funny.
Maybe she's humorless.
But there are very funny things in here.
I mean, when you're talking about, pardon me, but you're talking, you talk about enjoying being a young woman.
I have here, page 185, you spent adolescence in a sexual trance, a fever of erotic longing.
And then you talk about, you know, how generations change, and you talk about
various kinds of orgasms, you know, which weren't supposed to be pleasurable in your time, but apparently— Oh, yeah, we were allowed to have a pleasurable orgasm.
What was wrong with all these books, it was that they had a curious kind of religious tint about them, you know, which doesn't have much to do as real sex.
But I find this very, you know, entertaining.
There's also a volume I can sell there.
I try to read all the books.
It's a pretty good book.
It's a feminist companion to English literature.
You're familiar with that book, Yale.
I like to read, you know, just to receive.
And they were very respectful to you, but they say that your exploration of inner space fiction, is that a phrase that's germane to any of the
One of them, yes, that was Briefing for Defending the Hell.
The interspace fiction is kind of nice.
Do you expect that your work, the body of your work, and I don't have the numbers, but my God, how many volumes must it be?
You can count it on the title page there, but do you expect it to be, do you see it as a porpoise of work, as an integral?
Is everything an element of the body of work?
Is everything part of it?
It's all linked as far as I'm concerned.
It's a kind of organic growth, really.
One book to the next.
And to understand Doris Lessing, one must really then attend to the body of work, I guess.
Come on, I don't expect anything so much.
There are people who read everything I write, but
Some people just read bookings of them.
I mean, there are people who can't bear fantastic differences if they don't read the cannabis book.
But you are certainly justly regarded as a writer of serious fiction.
It must give you some satisfaction to know that this stuff is going to be there in the 24th century and beyond, I'm sure, what hopes are being read.
Does it speak for its time, do you think?
I do think.
I do think some of them are a record of its time, particularly the Golden Notebook.
You know, when I wrote it, I thought, one of the reasons I wrote it was because I wished novels, certain novels had been written about from the 19th century that were never written.
And I knew that the time that was just finishing, that we're now 56, 57, 58.
I knew that something was finishing that had been quite extraordinary, and I wanted to get it down before it disappeared.
And you were a young woman when you wrote that book.
I mean, did you actually have this perception of when you were ending and another one... Yes, I did.
I did indeed.
It was very, very clear.
It was palpable.
I mean, you... No, because don't forget I'd been a communist.
I wasn't when I wrote it, but the thing was,
Soviet communism came to an end not in the last three years ago.
It ended basically with Khrushchev's speech to the 20th Congress, which you've probably never heard of.
But in the communist world, this was a great dramatic event.
And as a result of this, I mean, a lot of communists broke their hearts.
You know, very good people.
We had a totally...
rosey idea of life, actually, and communism.
And I was observing a breakup of something.
I was observing it was like a landslide.
And I knew that was finished, that was all finished.
Do you have any kind of a political hope, I mean, for an alternative?
I mean, if that's finished, is there an answer then?
God forbid that we should have any more utopian movements like communism.
They're recipes for murder.
Well, we've already got them.
They happen to be religious.
Well, the biggest joke, you know, is that me and my lot, we used to congratulate each other.
We used to say, at least, we can never again have a nationalist war or a religious war.
How about that for being wrong?
Do you get angry when you write?
Does anger, is there an edge of anger in there?
Well... It's when I write.
You know, even now, I can't... The predominant emotion for me in my life in the Second World War
anger over the waste, because we knew it was the money that was being wasted, we could transform the world, and we humanity.
This was the strongest emotion.
I mean, when I think about it now, why is it we can go to war so efficiently, but we can't spend that money on improving the world?
There was a thing on 60 Minutes last night, they showed this stone plane.
It's a hundred million dollars each.
It's just the most remarkable device.
It can repel the radar and it can come in.
It'll probably be obsolete in ten years.
Whatever, but there's no qualm about spending that kind of money to develop this extraordinary fighting machine.
We've got all our priorities wrong.
I don't know.
Well, I'm kind of running up on my hour, and I don't want to overextend myself.
Oh, it's okay.
And so how are you coming with the next volume of the memoir?
Well, actually, what I've been doing in the last several months, I wrote a novel about four years ago, which didn't work, didn't gel.
While this one was going through the machinery, I fixed that out and saw if I, anyway, it's been rewritten again.
And now it works, so I sent that to a typist last week.
If there were four vault twos, it'll probably be a novel.
So you say typist, you still write in longhand, then I gather.
No, I write in typewriter, but I, old-fashioned, but I'm a very bad typist because when I type for Hansard, you know, I type for Parliament.
at this extreme speed that we needed, and it just ruined my typing.
I can't type a sentence without a mistake.
I can't.
See, I love to—I type very quickly.
Well, and well.
And well, very well.
You see, I can't.
And I love word processes.
I have—I dance.
Well— You think I might not—probably that's the next thing I have to do.
I don't think so.
I think that for writing
kind of writing which is probably more contemplative and requires a bit more.
You see, when you go through, for, I don't know, a false time, there are still things that you'll notice, but simply the slowness of the typing and the rhythm of the, it's, um, I think I'm so used to it now that I couldn't change that.
Do you ever throw things away?
Oh, yes, all the time.
Absolutely.
So if something isn't working, I mean, you say early on, I think the year was 1937, and you say, I wrote two apprentice books, and you were very disappointed with what you had written, and apparently, I guess you threw them away.
Yes, I did.
But this is something worth noting, that you started to write, you wrote something, and you said, this is not good.
So you know.
I mean, you're your harshest critic then, I gather.
Yes, I am, but sometimes you have to leave things to sit around a few months before you stay.
And stand back.
And going back to the five books of the future, it is interesting that you did use archives, the device of writing about it from recorded
because I'm fascinated by archives and the things that we read.
They are fascinating, aren't they?
And that's what my book is about, the written records by which we know what's passed on from one generation to the next.
I mean, you obviously have... Sometimes it comes to me, what a credit hub the novel is, the last four centuries, of information about people, about places.
I mean,
It's an extraordinary achievement, a novel, isn't it?
It is.
You mentioned this one fellow towards the end of the book who gave you a short list of essential books.
Yes.
Thankfully, he did start with Don Quixote, but it was always changing.
Do you have a list of essential books?
No.
You've got Hamlet in there, too, which is...
Well, I've gone off by newspapers.
I mean, I always do, because of anything to encourage reading.
I mean, I couldn't come up with ten books.
I think it's the most astonishing edifice, this novel, which we take for cautious.
It's amazing.
It really is, isn't it?
The novel, I mean, truth in fiction, I guess, is where that comes from.
Yeah.
I mean, do you know that there are whole countries that we know about truth.
We know about pre-Revelies near Russia through the great Russian writers.
We wouldn't know about them from anywhere else.
Who among your contemporaries do you read, or is that an answer to your question?
I never answer that one.
Okay, fine.
I guess I sensed it was nice to... I've got an awful lot of material.
I don't want to...
It's always called the native problem, isn't it, by some such phrase.
In Ireland it's the problem, or the native problem, or whatever.
The trouble system is what they use.
Well, when I was growing up it was called the native problem, and white civilisation, a phrase which I always give me makes me laugh, and the colour bar, all these phrases have disappeared.
It is interesting.
We haven't even discussed it, but you use the Cole Porter lyric, obviously, for the title.
You use it in one of the epigraphs, and then you use it again in the book itself.
Tell me a little bit why you chose to use this particular song for the title.
Well, you see that there are three epigraphs.
There were three of them.
I said one of the ones.
Oh, but they're all on the same theme.
The one about coercive agents, it says.
While you have patterns of conditioning inside you, you can't act differently outside those patterns.
And then there's, you have a very remarkable chap called Edward Hall, researching into rhythms of groups, and I can't understand why people haven't swooped on that rhythm, pride in amazement, because it says so much about society.
And all these three
quotes are all on the same subject, that is, that we're not as free as we think we are.
And you also, you give us these little touchstones at the Times, you know, you mentioned the arrival of American, your exposure to American jazz and the talkies, the movies come in.
Yes.
But I have the sense that you like jazz music.
I love jazz music.
Very much, very much, yes.
It's been about four years at Merston.
God, what an experience.
What music?
I'm curious.
It's quite a job, actually, getting permission to quote lyrics in a book, isn't it?
Well, thank God they did it.
I didn't.
Their publishers did it.
I know.
I quote a guy, this African-American guy who put together a remarkable collection of African-American literature.
I think it's Charles Bloxson.
And he's a great athlete.
And he gave up.
He was actually offered a professional.
football contract, and he walked away from it, so he wanted to become, at his words, a black bibliophile.
This is a long introduction, but he was in New York one day, and he said, I took the A train to Harlem.
You know, this guy, da-da-da-da-da-da, like that.
And boy, the trouble, I don't like, I mean, how difficult it was to actually get to use, I said, to hell with it, pardon me, I will just paraphrase it.
And I said, he hummed an off-bar thing from Duke Ellington's famous
song with the same name.
Because if you start quoting the lyric, it's amazing the difficulty you have to go through to actually quote a song.
Well, you see, the thing was that they are part of the text of the book.
They are.
They're wonderful.
But they fixed it.
That was handled.
It is fortunate that you have the same publisher in the UK that you have here.
That helps, doesn't it?
It is.
So anyway, I was lucky about that.
But the one that I've written, one I've just finished, has a lot of poetry quoted.
Well, that's easier because everyone's dead.
It's a part of the fabric of the book.
I try to quote some poetry of a living person and forget it.
I mean, I know exactly what you're saying.
I think I've basically... Oh, I'd love to ask you about this thing.
Jane Somerset.
Yeah.
Tell me a little bit about what prompted you to do that and your response to it.
Is it a commentary on publishing today or were you really just trying to give a response to your writing?
Well, a lot of different things.
I really knew how the machinery of publishing works in England back to front and I had a pretty good idea what would happen.
because the first book of that, the Diaries of Jane, I mean, sorry, the Diary of a Good Neighbour, is in fact just a little bit off the centre and easy to refuse.
I did that for a purpose.
And it was turned down by my two main publishers, and I discovered it later that the readers had read it, not the actual publishers.
The readers' reports were extremely patronising,
as they often are with young whites.
But the third publisher, who was my first publisher, Michael Joseph, took it, saying that Hermione had a young Doris Lessing.
So we said, for God's sake, we took it in the secret.
Don't say that.
So then what happened next was three European publishers took it, not knowing it was by me.
Now that's what really cheered me up.
And then my American publisher, a very clever Bob Gottlieb, recognized it.
He did?
and we said, hush.
So... He published it in his mouth?
Yes, I have a very different name under James Thomas.
And it was sent to the experts on my work who didn't recognize it.
But I have to say in their defense that we are all sent so many books that it's easy not to read books because, you know, they climb up your walls.
But I wonder, did they indicate on the copy that
This is the pseudonym of a... No.
...the pen name of a family?
Generally.
Really?
It was very terribly done, if I say so myself.
I worked out a persona that was a literary one.
She was a female journalist.
I said, this is the pen name of a female journalist.
So that meant all the female journalists reviewed it in this country.
But an interesting thing happened.
I was told that
Somebody wrote to me and said that they'd written an extremely enthusiastic review for the New York Times.
They thought it was wonderful.
And the New York Times refused to publish it.
So it could have had a good review in the New York Times.
Was it the New York... What's the other one?
The Review?
Yes.
The Review of Books?
That's right.
They run the long essays.
The Review of Books is like a tabloid.
Oh, no, no.
It was the New York Times essay.
And so it could have had a very good review in the New York Times, but they planned it down.
And so what it actually got was kind of... revealed a promising newcomer, yes, that's what it got.
And I found it all enormously entertaining.
So now is this book... Well, now it's under my name.
It's under your name.
But it's still... it was published under...
in three European countries on the game.
I wasn't quite well.
Then it was published on Imani.
But were you satisfied with an experiment for you?
What did you want to learn?
Oh, I wanted to know.
You know, because you feel sort of inside a great cloud of associations.
What do you feel would be like to be out, to get out?
And to be unknown and to have the work
evaluated totally as a work from somebody nobody knows.
So were you satisfied with the results that it got?
Did it do basically pretty well, I mean, in terms of the critical response?
Well, it got a few good reviews.
You know, it was like a promising first.
No, not anything like the grass singing, which got a very good review.
And I knew that the New York Times would have had a very good review.
I'm going to close.
Would you kindly describe my picture?